# `gdx-liftoff` Guide

If you've used libGDX for even a short time, you've probably used the official `gdx-setup.jar` made by the libGDX team. It's seen
major improvements lately, but it still lags behind in some areas -- it uses an outdated Gradle version most of the time,
it has relatively few third-party extensions available, and some of the Gradle configuration could be better, especially for HTML
projects and projects that want to use jpackage or Graal Native Image to distribute executables.
This project provides another alternative setup tool based on
[SquidSetup](https://github.com/tommyettinger/SquidSetup), but removing the close ties to the SquidLib libraries to make it more general-use. Using SquidSetup's
code, which is built on [czyzby's code](https://github.com/czyzby/gdx-setup), gives us working projects that use Gradle
8.5, ahead of the official setup and farther ahead of 4.0.2 for czyzby's gdx-setup. The current Gradle version is 8.5 at the time of writing.
This allows new projects to "just work" on machines where Java 8 through 21 could be the default, and the moderate amount of configuration
changes needed for Gradle 8.x are all handled by gdx-liftoff. Thanks to the Gretty plugin's latest release, Gradle 8.x
now works well with the HTML platform, without additional quirky configuration (earlier versions of Liftoff needed that).
Currently, gdx-liftoff projects depend on libGDX 1.12.1 by default, and allow using earlier versions or snapshots as well.
The current version of libGDX is 1.12.1 . You can choose any released version of
libGDX (or a nightly version) in the Advanced tab of the program window; it will be downloaded if needed when you import
the Gradle project into your IDE or run one of most Gradle tasks. If you're updating from an older libGDX version, see
[the official migration guide](https://libgdx.com/news/2021/04/the-ultimate-migration-guide).

Projects default to using LWJGL3 instead of LWJGL2 (the old 'desktop' platform), since code tends to be very similar between the two, but LWJGL3 generally offers
more features. Somewhat confusingly, gdx-setup used LWJGL2 for its desktop platform until recently, but now uses LWJGL3 and
still calls it 'desktop'. Liftoff projects can have both LWJGL2 and LWJGL3 modules, which shouldn't be needed for too much
longer, but is sometimes needed now. The "lwjgl2" module is LWJGL2, and "lwjgl3" is, well, LWJGL3. **If following a tutorial**,
you may need to change mentions of the "desktop" or "lwjgl2" module to "lwjgl3". This code is tested
for compatibility with GWT, including the various changes that Gradle needs with this version. It is sometimes tested on Android,
but Android Studio is often incompatible with recent Gradle releases, and Android certainly doesn't support Java 12 or higher features across the board. Issues
with iOS and RoboVM will have to be addressed by someone sending a pull request, because I can't reproduce any iOS issues without an iOS device.

The current version of gdx-liftoff uses LWJGL3 internally; 1.9.10.5 used LWJGL2 in an attempt to be compatible with libGDX's TexturePacker, but there seem to be
more compatibility issues with LWJGL2, maybe since it hasn't been updated in 5+ years, than with LWJGL3. This perhaps validates the decision to default to LWJGL3
for new projects generated by gdx-liftoff.

Using the latest Gradle, as gdx-liftoff tries to always do, is important when there are ongoing security concerns. The
latest Gradle versions are all pre-configured to avoid vulnerable versions of log4j (which had the serious "log4shell"
vulnerability exploited starting in December 2021). We don't need the mitigations that earlier versions of gdx-liftoff
used to avoid vulnerable log4j versions, now that Gradle has updated and considers this automatically. 

## Usage

- Get the latest `gdx-liftoff.jar` from the [Releases tab](https://github.com/libgdx/gdx-liftoff/releases) of this project.
    - If you have an older gdx-liftoff.jar, or you aren't sure when it was released, getting the current latest is a good idea.
- Regardless of what platforms you intend to target, make sure the steps
  [described by the libGDX wiki here](https://libgdx.com/wiki/start/setup)
  are taken care of.
- Run the JAR. Plug in whatever options you see fit:
    - For the Platforms tab, LWJGL3 starts enabled by default (it works on all desktop/laptop platforms), and you can
      manually check other platforms to match your needs.
      If you target iOS, it will only build on a macOS machine. Downloading iOS (and/or HTML) dependencies can take some
      time, so just check the platforms you want to target. You can re-run the setup, make a new project with the same
      settings (in a different folder), and copy in the existing code if you want to quickly change platforms.
        - LWJGL2 and/or LWJGL3 should usually be checked, so you can test on the same computer you develop on.
            - LWJGL3 is almost the same as LWJGL2, but because it has better support for new hardware
              (such as high-DPI displays), it should probably be preferred. It also allows multiple windows and drag+drop.
                - LWJGL3 itself supports Linux on arm32 and arm64 hardware, and libGDX since version 1.9.13 (current is
                  1.12.1) also supports ARM Linux on desktop platforms.
                - The new ARM Macs are now supported as of libGDX 1.11.0 or later when using the LWJGL3 backend.
                  LWJGL2 does appear to work via macOS "Rosetta" emulation, though.
            - LWJGL2 should mostly be preferred if you need to also depend on gdx-tools, such as if you need to run the
              texture packer at runtime. Some machines have issues with an inconsistent or very high framerate with LWJGL3,
              and using the "Legacy" desktop can fix that. This platform can also be less compatible with some JDKs, and
              distributing a JDK from [Adoptium](https://adoptium.net/) usually fixes that.
                - The framerate limit problem is currently solved with both LWJGL2 and LWJGL3, as long as you use libGDX
                  1.9.12 or higher.
                - The "less compatible" JDK issue manifests as a crash immediately at startup, with several warnings printed
                  (which themselves don't matter), and a line right after them mentioning `ld.so` or a linking error. If you
                  encounter this, switch to AdoptOpenJDK (bundling it with releases) or LWJGL3.
                - The warnings on startup when using (legacy) desktop are somewhat important to note; even though they say
                  the application won't be allowed to start on future JDK versions, LWJGL 2 and 3 both will adapt to any
                  inability to use certain internal APIs, and both should run perfectly fine on Java 16 and up, even though those
                  default to blocking what the warnings mention. Actually, Java 16 and up shouldn't emit these warnings at all.
                    - Even if you didn't build a JAR with Java 17, you can still run the generated JAR
                      with Java 17, and this may be a good idea for distribution because of some speed and stability
                      improvements in that JVM release. 17 is also an LTS release, and those tend to get more adoption.
                    - Java 18 is out now, and supported by the current Gradle, but it isn't an LTS release.
        - iOS should probably *not* be checked if you aren't running macOS and don't intend to later build an iOS
          app on a Mac. It needs some large dependencies to be downloaded when you first import the project.
            - If you have a Mac that is set up for iOS development, please try to generate any project and see if it gets
              made correctly! We've had some [good feedback](https://github.com/libgdx/gdx-liftoff/issues/28) on iOS
              projects, but any extra usage info would help ensure that liftoff is ready for any libGDX usage. It isn't a
              typical usage for a [GitHub Issue](https://github.com/libgdx/gdx-liftoff/issues), but sending any
              feedback as an issue, whether it's "iOS projects work for me" or "iOS support is broken" would really help.
            - Support for iOS should be better as of 1.10.0.3, but it could still use more testing. There are changes in
              libGDX 1.10.0 that should really help iOS projects out of the box; if you encounter screen trouble with any
              template applications, first add a Viewport like you would for any other platform, and see if there is still
              an issue. If you still have clipping or a smaller view area, post an issue. Several changes happened in
              libGDX 1.10.0 to improve behavior on iOS, and gdx-liftoff may need to apply some changes to template code
              for iOS projects to work more cleanly with libGDX 1.10.0.
        - Android should only be checked if you've set up your computer for Android development. Since gdx-liftoff uses
          Gradle 8.5, having an Android project present shouldn't interfere with other platforms or IDE integration, as
          long as your IDE supports Gradle 8.5 (current Android Studio and IDEA both support it).
            - **You must set your project's JDK to a version 17 or higher** to use Android, due to a new requirement of the
              Android Gradle Plugin used by Android Studio and IDEA. JDK 17 is the most versatile option right now, because
              it can be used with gdx-setup projects and Android projects. JDK 17 or 18 will work. You could have to
              open older projects, so having JDK 17 installed is a good idea. Java 21 should work here, but will be completely
              broken if you try to use it with gdx-setup projects at this point in time.
            - Having an Android module in a larger project changes some of IDEA's features, including disabling hot-swap.
              Some libGDX developers take the approach of having a separate Android-only project, keeping desktop platforms
              completely disconnected from Android. This also lets the assets be different, so it has other advantages.
            - If `Java version` is set to 8 on the Advanced tab, then gdx-liftoff sets up the Android configuration to use
              core library desugaring and other Java-8-related features, allowing a large subset of Java 8 language
              features, and the standard library in JDK 8, to be used across most platforms (not iOS, though).
              - Several 3rd-party dependencies require Java 8, such as TuningFork (which is LWJGL3-only), and jdkgdxds
              (which works on Android if the above Java 8 steps are taken).
            - If you are using an Android Studio version before 4.2 or an IDEA version before 2021.2, you can set the
              Android Gradle Plugin on the Advanced tab to a lower version, like 4.0.2, that is compatible with that older
              IDE version.
            - The Android Gradle Plugin (AGP) version is currently set at 8.1.4 and is not configurable from within Liftoff.
              This was required because IDEA's and Android Studio's AGP Upgrade Assistant requires the AGP version to be part
              of the dependency String, and not in a properties file (which is what Liftoff usually uses). On the plus side,
              this lets you use the AGP Upgrade Assistant now. It isn't always a great idea, particularly if you need to use
              both Android Studio and IDEA (IDEA usually supports only a lower version of AGP than what Android Studio can use).
        - HTML is a more-involved target, with some perfectly-normal code on all other platforms acting completely
          different on HTML due to the tool used, Google Web Toolkit (GWT). It's almost always possible to work around
          these differences and make things like random seeds act the same on all platforms, but it takes work. Mostly,
          you need to be careful with the `long` and `int` number types, and relates to `int` not overflowing as it
          would on desktop, and `long` not being visible to reflection. See [this small guide to GWT](https://libgdx.com/wiki/html5-backend-and-gwt-specifics)
          for more. It's very likely that you won't notice any difference unless you try to make behavior identical on GWT
          and other platforms, and even then there may be nothing apparent.
            - GWT 2.11.0 is available but doesn't integrate with libGDX by default; there's a third-party [replacement to the
              official GWT backend](https://github.com/tommyettinger/gdx-backends#112101) that supports it with libGDX
              1.12.1. Using GWT 2.11.0 allows Java 11's `var` keyword to be used, plus other Java 11 features, and
              allows using a little of the standard library. The third-party 2.11.0 backend is currently used by default.
    - For dependencies, you don't need libGDX checked (the tool is ready to download libGDX and set it as a
      dependency in all cases).
        - There are lots of potential dependencies you can add, some official but most third-party (unofficial).
        - Some to note: ShapeDrawer is a great replacement for ShapeRenderer from libGDX, Ashley (official) and
          Artemis-ODB (third-party, well-maintained) are both useful Entity-Component System libraries, Typing-Label
          provides all sorts of effects for text, RegExodus and Formic provide support for missing features in GWT,
          TenPatch enhances the options for NinePatches in GUIs, simple-graphs and gdx-ai are different options for AI,
          Anim8-GDX provides ways to write GIFs and other images that libGDX can't normally write, gdx-gltf is a much
          better way to handle modern 3D graphics in libGDX, and Lombok is a popular way to reduce boilerplate in Java.
            - Yes, I wrote or contributed to some of these, so I'm biased.
    - There are options to add language support for non-Java JVM languages; of these, Kotlin is the best-supported.
        - The HTML target won't work with non-Java languages, and others targets may be questionable.
        - Kotlin should work well on Android, LWJGL2 and LWJGL3, and will probably work well on iOS.
            - You can see some extra ways to use Kotlin as the Gradle build language in Quillraven's
              [Dark-Matter](https://github.com/Quillraven/Dark-Matter) repo; it also uses Kotlin launchers.
            - You can select Kotlin templates on the templates tab, if Kotlin is selected as a language.
            - Some third-party extensions only work with Kotlin, like the KTX libraries.
        - Scala and Groovy should definitely work on LWJGL2 and LWJGL3, and may work on Android and iOS.
        - Clojure may technically work on Android but is usually incredibly slow without extra steps for Android
          compatibility; it's doubtful if it would work on iOS. You probably shouldn't use Gradle to build Clojure
          projects anyway; it has its own (excellent) project manager `lein` and a simple built-in manager.
    - In the Templates tab, you can select various sets of starting code that gdx-liftoff will generate in your new
      project. Classic will show a white screen with a pixel-style face when you run, so it can be good to verify that
      a project works, while ApplicationAdapter is probably the easiest to bring an existing game into. The super-koalio
      demo is from libGDX's tests, and may act as a good way to test input and basic graphics in a new project.
    - In Advanced, you can set the libGDX version (it defaults to 1.12.1, but can be set lower or higher) and
      various other versions, including the default Java compatibility. Typically, `Java version` is the minimum across
      all platforms, and should be 7 or more (8 is generally safe). You can set `Desktop Java version` to any version at
      least equal to `Java version`, and similarly for `Server Java version`; these only affect the LWJGL2/LWJGL3 and
      Server modules, respectively. You can set `Java version` to as high as 18 if you have Java 18 installed, or
      similarly for Java 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, or 17, but it will require users to also have Java of that version, or for you
      to distribute a JRE of the appropriate version with your game.
        - Distributing Java 14, 15, 16, 17, or 18 is much easier now thanks to Beryx'
          "[Badass Runtime Plugin](https://github.com/raeleus/skin-composer/wiki/Deploying-libGDX-with-jpackage-and-Badass-Runtime),"
          which may be included in future versions to help ease the process of releasing a game.
        - HTML projects this generates always use language level 8, even if the JDK is newer. A comment in
          `html/build.gradle` provides some instructions for how to use an alternate backend and use as new as Java 11. 
- Click generate, and very soon a window should pop up with instructions for what to do.
    - Generation is very fast here, relative to gdx-setup, because it doesn't run Gradle tasks at this point. When you
      see `SETUP COMPLETE` in green, the build is done; at the time you import the generated `build.gradle` project
      file, some tasks will run.

Now you'll have a project all set up with a sample. In IntelliJ IDEA or Android Studio, you can choose to open the
`build.gradle` file and select "Open as Project" to get started. In Eclipse or Netbeans, the process should be similar;
see [libGDX's documentation](https://libgdx.com/wiki/start/import-and-running).

- The way to run a game project that's probably the most reliable is to use Gradle tasks
  to do any part of the build/run process. The simplest way to do this is in the IDE itself,
  via `View -> Tool Windows -> Gradle`, and selecting tasks to perform, such as
  `lwjgl3 -> Tasks -> application -> run.` If you try to run a specific class' `main()`
  method, you may encounter strange issues, but this shouldn't happen with Gradle tasks.
    - To run a `main()` method, you usually need to set a run configuration so the working folder is `assets`.
      The location of the `assets` folder is different here than with the official setup; it's at the same depth as
      `core` or `lwjgl3`, and doesn't change across configurations like with the official setup.
- If you had the LWJGL3 (or LWJGL2) option checked in the setup, and you chose a non-empty
  template in the Templates tab, you can run the LWJGL3 or LWJGL2 module right away.
    - You can build a runnable jar that includes all it needs to run using
      `lwjgl3 -> Tasks -> build -> jar`; this jar will be in `lwjgl3/build/lib/` when it finishes.
      Note: this is the command-line option `gradlew lwjgl3:jar`, but the `dist` command
      used by the official setup jar will still work as an alias. Substitute `lwjgl2` where `lwjgl3` is if you use
      the legacy LWJGL2 version.
- If you had the Android option checked in the setup and have a non-empty template,
  you can try to run the Android module on an emulator or a connected Android device.
- If you had the GWT option checked in the setup and have a non-empty template,
  you can go through the slightly slow, but simple, build for GWT, probably using the `superDev`
  task for the `gwt` module, or also possibly the `dist` task in that module.
    - GWT builds have gotten much faster with Gradle 7.6 (since Gradle 6, really) and some adjustments to
      configuration, so if you were avoiding GWT builds because of slow compile times, you might want to try again.
- If you had the iOS option checked in the setup, you're running Mac OS X,
  and you have followed all the steps for iOS development with libGDX, maybe you can run
  an iOS task? I can't try myself without a Mac or iOS device, so if you can get this to
  work, posting an issue with any info for other iOS targeters would be greatly appreciated.
- Consider changing the icons when you're looking to distribute your app. [appicon.co](https://appicon.co/) or
  some similar service can generate all the different requisite sizes.
    - `ios/data/Media.xcassets/AppIcon.appiconset` has the iOS icons, `android/res` has icons in
      subfolders, and `lwjgl3/src/main/resources` has icons for desktop with LWJGL3. You'll probably
      want to keep the icons' existing names, and customize their content.

Gradle has some quirks. Here's some notes on things you might encounter during upgrades from
other projects or older versions.

 - All builds currently use Gradle 7.6 with the "api/implementation/compile fiasco" resolved. Adding dependencies
  will use the `api` keyword instead of the `compile` keyword it used in earlier versions. All modules use the
  `java-library` plugin, which enables the `api` keyword for dependencies.
   - You can use the `implementation` keyword for dependencies in any module except `core`; this is supposed to
   have some benefits, but I'm honestly not sure what they are.
 - You may need to refresh the Gradle project after the initial import if some dependencies timed-out;
  JitPack dependencies in particular may take up to 15 minutes to become available if you're using any of those,
  like gdx-gltf. In IntelliJ IDEA, the `Reimport all Gradle projects` button is a pair of circling arrows in the
  Gradle tool window, which can be opened with `View -> Tool Windows -> Gradle`.
 - Like the official gdx-setup, the now-shut-down `jcenter()` repo will not be used in new projects.
   - In earlier versions, jcenter() was last in the list because of a different flaw it had that allowed impersonation. 
   You may have guessed that I am not sad to see it shut down in favor of better alternatives.
   It's still annoying to have to deal with it closing on short notice, though.

## Known Issues

- MacOS does not like the legacy desktop apps, showing all sorts of visual glitches.
  It seems to work fine with LWJGL3, in part because that platform had special attention
  paid to it so the `gradlew lwjgl3:run` command can work at all on macOS.
    - Consider adding the third-party extension Guacamole to handle a special macOS/LWJGL3 requirement (it
      needs `-XstartOnFirstThread` to be passed to the `java` command, but Guacamole can handle this for you
      and your users).
    - Apps for end-users have to include a bundled JRE to be distributed via the Mac App Store, and it's generally a
      good idea to distribute your JRE of choice, so you know what bugs to expect. If you bundle a JRE, you can set the
      launcher to use `-XstartOnFirstThread`, and so don't need Guacamole for that.
- Android hasn't been tested enough, and the generated manifest is probably not very good.
    - You can modify the manifest, and probably need to do so if you want to submit an app to the Play store.
    - Android Studio should have better support for recent Gradle versions if you use a beta release.
    - The default path to the Android SDK is determined by your `ANDROID_SDK_ROOT` variable. If this variable wasn't set
      on the first time you ran gdx-liftoff, then the latest value entered for the Android SDK path will be saved in
      `~/.prefs/gdx-liftoff-prefs` (that is, inside `.prefs/` in your user home directory). Starting in 1.10.0.7,
      gdx-liftoff will pre-fill the Android SDK path with `ANDROID_SDK_ROOT` if it hasn't been set yet, but will use the
      last used path if there's a historical path. You can change any and all settings history by either editing
      `~/.prefs/gdx-liftoff-prefs` or just deleting that file and having gdx-liftoff remake it.
    - The Android SDK version is now set at exactly 34, but this should change in future versions of Liftoff as
      new versions of the Android OS require updates. Currently, Google play requires a target SDK of 34 for newly
      submitted projects.

## Contributions

See the [architecture document](Architecture.md) for more details on how the application works internally.

When submitting pull requests, please format the code with the `./gradlew ktlintFormat` task.
